---
slug: "/blog/1690"
date: "2021-08-31"
title: "1690. Stone Game VII"
difficulty: "Medium"
topics: "Array Math DynamicProgramming"
---

### Problem Description

Alice and Bob take turns playing a game, with Alice starting first.

There are n stones arranged in a row. On each player's turn, they can remove either the leftmost stone or the rightmost stone from the row and receive points equal to the sum of the remaining stones' values in the row. The winner is the one with the higher score when there are no stones left to remove.

Bob found that he will always lose this game (poor Bob, he always loses), so he decided to **minimize the score's difference**. Alice's goal is to **maximize the difference in the score**.

Given an array of integers stones where stones[i] represents the value of the i<sup>th</sup> stone from the left, return the difference in Alice and Bob's score if they both play optimally.

#### Example 1:

> **Input**: stones = [5,3,1,4,2] <br> **Output**: 6 <br> **Explanation**:
>
> - Alice removes 2 and gets 5 + 3 + 1 + 4 = 13 points. Alice = 13, Bob = 0, stones = [5,3,1,4].
> - Bob removes 5 and gets 3 + 1 + 4 = 8 points. Alice = 13, Bob = 8, stones = [3,1,4].
> - Alice removes 3 and gets 1 + 4 = 5 points. Alice = 18, Bob = 8, stones = [1,4].
> - Bob removes 1 and gets 4 points. Alice = 18, Bob = 12, stones = [4].
> - Alice removes 4 and gets 0 points. Alice = 18, Bob = 12, stones = [].
> - The score difference is 18 - 12 = 6.

#### Example 2:

> **Input**: stones = [7,90,5,1,100,10,10,2] <br> **Output**: 122

#### Constraints:

- n == stones.length
- 2 <= n <= 1000
- 1 <= stones[i] <= 1000

---

### Solution

This looks like a minimax problem where Bob is trying to minimize the possible loss for a worst case senario, where Alice plays perfectly and causes maximum loss to Bob.

These minimax and maximin problems can sometimes be simplified to a single minimization or maximization operation. In our case, both Alice and Bob's objective can be described as maximizing the _total relative score_, which is _my total score - opponent total score_. But this will be hard to implement because we would need to keep track of total scores and whose turn it is. The _total relative score_ can also be calculated using _score for current turn - opponent's relative score_. Example: Flames lead Oilers by 2 goals in the 2nd period, Oilers score 3 goals in the 3rd period -> Oilers relative score becomes 3 - 2 = lead by 1.

Now we just have to choose to remove the left or right side of the array based on results of the previous turn and pick based on maximum value of _relative score_. Dynamic Programming will be useful here for memoization purposes and keeping track of all possible outcomes from the previous turn.

We can use a top-down approach, let dynamic programming array be dp[left][right], where left and right denotes the positions of the stones present in the array. The final condition is `dp(0, n-1)`, where all stones are accounted for and n is size of the stones array. Recursively calculate the _relative score_ by taking `max(removeLeft - dp(left+1, right), removeRight - dp(left, right-1))`. `removeLeft` and `removeRight` are scores for the current turn depending on which side is removed. Base condition will be left == right, which returns 0, because only one stone is left, and a stone cannot be chosen to be removed and affect the score.

Finally, we can use a `sums` array and `sum` helper function to hold the cumulative sum values for stones, and make it easier to calculate `removeLeft` and `removeRight` for each turn.

#### Java Solution:

```java
class Solution {
    int[] sums;
    Integer[][] memo;

    public int stoneGameVII(int[] stones) {
        int n = stones.length;
        sums = new int[n+1];
        memo = new Integer[n][n];

        // calculating cumulative sums
        for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
            sums[i+1] = sums[i] + stones[i];
        }

        return dp(0, n-1);
    }

    private int dp(int left, int right) {
        if (left == right) return 0;
        if (memo[left][right] != null) return memo[left][right];

        int removeLeft = sum(left+1, right);
        int removeRight = sum(left, right-1);

        int relative = Math.max(removeLeft - dp(left+1, right), removeRight - dp(left, right-1));

        return memo[left][right] = relative;
    }

    private int sum(int left, int right) {
        return sums[right+1] - sums[left];
    }
}
```

#### Python Solution:

```python
class Solution:
    def stoneGameVII(self, stones: List[int]) -> int:
        n = len(stones)
        sums = [0] * (n + 1)
        memo = [[None] * n for i in range(n)]
        # calculate cumulative sums
        for i in range(n):
            sums[i + 1] = sums[i] + stones[i]

        def dp(left, right):
            if left == right: return 0
            if memo[left][right]: return memo[left][right]

            removeLeft = sum(left + 1, right)
            removeRight = sum(left, right - 1)

            relative = max(removeLeft - dp(left + 1, right), removeRight - dp(left, right - 1))

            return memo[left][right] = relative

        def sum(left, right):
            return sums[right + 1] - sums[left]

        return dp(0, n - 1)
```

#### Time Complexity: **O(N<sup>2</sup>)**

Memo array is n \* n, and memoized recursion is linear, so all values in memo array calculated once

#### Space Complexity: **O(N<sup>2</sup>)**

Space taken by memo array

---
