---
slug: "/blog/871"
date: "2021-08-28"
title: "871. Minimum Number of Refueling Stops"
difficulty: "Hard"
topics: "Array Heap(PriorityQueue) Greedy"
---

### Problem Description

A car travels from a starting position to a destination which is target miles east of the starting position.

There are gas stations along the way. The gas stations are represented as an array stations where stations[i] = [position<sub>i</sub>, fuel<sub>i</sub>] indicates that the i<sup>th</sup> gas station is position<sub>i</sub> miles east of the starting position and has fuel<sub>i</sub> liters of gas.

The car starts with an infinite capacity fuel tank, which initially has startFuel liters of fuel in it. It uses one liter of gas per one mile that it drives. When the car reaches a gas station, it may stop and refuel, transferring all the gas from the station into the car.

Return the minimum number of refueling stops the car must make in order to reach its destination. If it cannot reach the destination, return -1.

Note that if the car reaches a gas station with 0 fuel left, the car can still refuel there. If the car reaches the destination with 0 fuel left, it is still considered to have arrived.

#### Example 1:

> **Input**: target = 100, startFuel = 10, stations = [[10,60],[20,30],[30,30],[60,40]] <br> **Output**: 2 <br> **Explanation**: We start with 10 liters of fuel. We drive to position 10, expending 10 liters of fuel. We refuel from 0 liters to 60 liters of gas. Then, we drive from position 10 to position 60 (expending 50 liters of fuel), and refuel from 10 liters to 50 liters of gas. We then drive to and reach the target. We made 2 refueling stops along the way, so we return 2.

#### Example 2:

> **Input**: target = 100, startFuel = 1, stations = [[10,100]] <br> **Output**: -1 <br> **Explanation**: We can not reach the target (or even the first gas station).

#### Constraints:

- 1 <= target, startFuel <= 10<sup>9</sup>
- 0 <= stations.length <= 500
- 0 <= position<sub>i</sub> <= position<sub>i+1</sub> < target
- 1 <= fuel<sub>i</sub> < 10<sup>9</sup>

---

### Solution

We can use variables prev and fuel to keep track of previous position and fuel amounts as we iterate through all the stations.

At each gas station, we have the choice to fill up or continue driving. Unless startFuel = target, fuel will become negative at some point between 2 gas stations if we do not fill up at any station.

To achieve the **minimum** number of fuel stops, we need to fill up at stations with the **maximum** capacity, provided we can reach these stations. So, what if we just keep driving until fuel is negative, then choose the largest gas stations we were able to reach to fuel up back to positive? Is there some way we can keep track of the station capacities we drove past from largest to smallest?

Heap or Priority Queue in Java is the data structure that comes to mind. At each gas station, fuel is updated, if fuel is negative, poll the largest gas stations we drove past and add it to fuel until it is positive. If the heap is empty and fuel is still negative, return -1 since we cannot reach the current station even if we refueled at every previous station. If fuel is positive, add the current station to the heap, update the current distance as prev, and continue to the next station.

Remember to calculate the last section between the last gas station and the target.

#### Java Solution:

```java
class Solution {
    public int minRefuelStops(int target, int startFuel, int[][] stations) {
        // lambda expression to compare based on second value of gas station
        PriorityQueue<int[]> pq = new PriorityQueue<>((a,b) -> b[1] - a[1]);
        int prev = 0, fuel = startFuel, res = 0;

        for (int[] s : stations) {
            int dist = s[0] - prev;
            fuel -= dist;
            // fill up on passed stations until fuel >= 0
            while (!pq.isEmpty() && fuel < 0) {
                fuel += pq.poll()[1];
                res++;
            }
            if (fuel < 0) return -1;
            prev = s[0];
            pq.add(s);
        }

        // last section to target
        fuel -= (target - prev);
        while (!pq.isEmpty() && fuel < 0) {
            fuel += pq.poll()[1];
            res++;
        }
        if (fuel < 0) return -1;

        return res;
    }
}
```

#### Python Solution:

Same heap concept, heapq used as priority queue equivalent, which stores in smallest to largest order.

```Python
class Solution:
    def minRefuelStops(self, target: int, startFuel: int, stations: List[List[int]]) -> int:
        pq = []
        stations.append((target, float('inf'))) # can add target as last station in python List

        res = prev = 0
        fuel = startFuel

        for position, capacity in stations:
            dist = position - prev
            fuel -= dist
            while pq and tank < 0:  # fill up until fuel >= 0
                fuel += -heapq.heappop(pq) # maxheap is simulated using negative values
                res += 1
            if fuel < 0: return -1
            prev = position
            heapq.heappush(pq, -capacity)

        return res
```

#### Time Complexity: **O(N log N)**

Heap operations are O(log N) and occurs N times for worst case, where N is the number of stations

#### Space Complexity: **O(N)**

All stations added and polled from heap in worst case

---
